PARQUET-1450: Detailed crypto specification (#114)
apache/parquet-format: Encryption.md

# Parquet Modular Encryption

Parquet files containing sensitive information can be protected by the modular
encryption mechanism that encrypts and authenticates the file data and metadata - 
while allowing for a regular Parquet functionality (columnar projection, 

> predicate pushdown, encoding and compression). This mechanism also enables column access 

Reviewer: I don't think this document should make the claim that this "enables column access control". Using different encryption keys can be used in a scheme that provides some form of access control, but in itself it doesn't provide what we commonly think of as "access control" because there is no way to revoke that access.

This document should be clear about what the feature provides -- the ability to encrypt columns with different keys or not encrypt a column -- and should not make claims about security guarantees that can be partilly built with these features.

find the offset of required pages, fetch the pages and decrypt the data. In this document, 
the term “footer” always refers to the regular Parquet footer - the `FileMetaData` structure, 
and its nested fields (row groups / column chunks). 

File encryption is flexible - each column and the footer can be encrypted with the same key, 
with a different key, or not encrypted at all.

The results of compression of column pages are encrypted before being written to the output 
stream. A new Thrift structure, with column crypto metadata, is added to column chunks of 
the encrypted columns. This metadata provides information about the column encryption keys.

The results of serialization of Thrift structures are encrypted, before being written 
to the output stream. 

The file footer can be either encrypted or left as a plaintext. In an encrypted footer mode, 
a new Thrift structure with file crypto metadata is added to the file. This metadata provides 
information about the file encryption algorithm and the footer encryption key. 

In a plaintext footer mode, the contents of the `FileMetaData` structure is visible, but it can 

> be optionally signed with a footer key in order to verify its integrity. The `FileMetaData` keeps

Reviewer: Why is this validation optional? I see no reason why it should be.

column key is different from the footer encryption key, the `ColumnMetaData` structure is serialized 
separately and encrypted with the column key. In this case, the `ColumnMetaData` is also considered to be 
a module.  

There are two module types: data modules (pages) and Thrift modules (all Thrift structures that 
are serialized separately).

## 4. Encryption Algorithms and Keys
Parquet encryption algorithms are based on the standard AES ciphers for symmetric encryption. 
AES is supported in Intel and other CPUs with hardware acceleration of crypto operations 
(“AES-NI”) - that can be leveraged, for example, by Java programs (automatically via HotSpot), 
or C++ programs (via EVP-* functions in OpenSSL). Parquet supports all standard AES key sizes: 
128, 192 and 256 bits. 

Initially, two algorithms have been implemented, one based on a GCM mode of AES, and the 
other on a combination of GCM and CTR modes.

AES GCM is an authenticated encryption. Besides the data confidentiality (encryption), it 
supports two levels of integrity verification (authentication): of the data (default), 
and of the data combined with an optional AAD (“additional authenticated data”). The 

> default authentication allows to make sure the data has not been tampered with. An AAD 

Reviewer: I think this should note that without an AAD, GCM validates that the encrypted bytes of a single encrypted buffer haven't been tampered with. I think it should also be clear that the "default" is when an AAD is not used.

is a free text to be signed, together with the data. The user can, for example, pass the 
file name with its version (or creation timestamp) as an AAD input, to verify that the 
file has not been replaced with an older version. The details on how Parquet creates 
and uses AADs are provided in the section 4.4.

> Sometimes, a hardware acceleration of AES is unavailable (e.g. in Java 8). Then AES crypto 

Reviewer: Above it says that Java is hardware accelerated automatically via HotSpot. Can you update that statement so it is clear what versions of Java it applies to (evidently not Java 8)?

operations are implemented in software, and can be somewhat slow, becoming a performance 
bottleneck in certain workloads. AES CTR is a regular (not authenticated) cipher. It is 
faster than GCM cipher, since it doesn’t perform integrity verification and doesn’t 

> calculate the authentication tag. Actually, GCM is a combination of CTR cipher and an 

Reviewer: The term "authentication tag" has not been defined. Can you add it to the description of AES-GCM above?

authentication layer  called GMAC. For applications running without AES acceleration 
and willing to compromise on content verification, CTR cipher can provide a boost in 
Parquet write/read throughput. The second Parquet algorithm encrypts the data content 
(pages) with CTR, and the metadata (Thrift structures) with GCM. This allows to encrypt/decrypt 
the bulk of the data faster, while still verifying the metadata integrity and making 
sure the file has not been replaced with a wrong version. However, tampering with the 

> page data might go unnoticed.

Reviewer: I still think that discussion of the encryption modes used and how Parquet uses them should be separate. Small notes like the one above with a reference to Parquet AAD construction are fine, but this level of detail requires a separate paragraph at a minimum.

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encrypted 

Reviewer: I think use of the terms IV and nonce can be cleaned up a bit still. Doesn't CTR in other documentation use a nonce and not an IV?

stream. The CTR IVs are comprised of two parts: a unique nonce (“number used once”) and 

> an initial counter field; both must be passed to the CTR cipher upon stream initialization. 

Reviewer: > both must be passed to the CTR cipher

Is this true for all implementations?

The GCM mode creates a CTR cipher internally, and passes an IV comprised of a nonce (passed to 
the GCM cipher upon stream initialization) and an initial counter field constructed internally 
by the GCM cipher according to the GCM specification (NIST SP 800-38D).
Parquet encryption uses the RBG-based (random bit generator) nonce construction as defined in 
the NIST SP 800-38D document, section 8.2.2. Notice: NIST SP 800-38D uses a term “IV” for what 
is called “nonce” in the Parquet encryption design.

> An input to AES CTR encryption is an encryption key, a 16-byte IV and a plaintext. The output

Reviewer: I think IVs should be a sub-section.

These two paragraphs introduce what the ciphers expect. The paragraph above should come after these to explain how Parquet encodes the nonce-portion of the IV (or the IV portion of the nonce?) for CTR.

is a ciphertext with the length equal to that of plaintext (for non-padding encryption).

An input to AES GCM encryption is an encryption key, a 12-byte nonce and a plaintext. The output
is a ciphertext with the length equal to that of plaintext (for non-padding encryption), and 
a 16-byte authentication tag used to verify the ciphertext integrity.

### 4.1 AES_GCM_V1 encryption algorithm
This Parquet algorithm encrypts all modules by the GCM cipher, without padding. The AES GCM cipher
must be implemented by a cryptographic provider according to the NIST SP 800-38D specification. 

Unique nonces are generated for each ciphertext. The nonce length is 12 bytes (96 bits). The NIST 

> specification requires a “random field” to fill all 12 bytes and an arbitrary “free field” 

Reviewer: What is the "free field"? What is the length of this field? I thought Parquet uses 12 random bytes?

Author: "free field" term comes from the NIST spec. The section 8.2.2 says the IVs are comprised of a "random field" and an optional "free field". However, for 96-bit IVs, it requires the random field to be 96-bit long, and "free field" to be empty.

Reviewer: The important thing for this section is that the reader understands what the algorithm requires. Then the sections for Parquet modes should specify how to take the 12-byte nonce and pass it to the AES algorithms.

to be empty for this nonce length (section 8.2.2). Parquet uses the option 1 for RGB implementation - 
"The random field shall .. consist of an output string of r(i) bits from an approved RBG with a 
sufficient security strength". That is, a fresh random byte array must be generated for each nonce - 
as opposed to the option 2 in the same spec - "or the result of applying the r(i)–bit incrementing 

> function to the random field of the preceding <nonce> for the given key"

Reviewer: Why is option 2 not allowed?

Author: the reason became invalid after our recent discussion. I'm returning this text to its previous form (which didnt restrict the random fields to option 1 only).

Reviewer: Sounds good to me.

### 4.2 AES_GCM_CTR_V1 encryption algorithm

> In this Parquet algorithm, all Thrift modules are encrypted with the GCM cipher, as described above. 

Reviewer: This should note "but page modules are encrypted with the CTR cipher, without padding". A separate paragraph is fine to define how CTR is used, but the difference between AES_GCM_V1 and AES_GCM_CTR_V1 should not be split across two paragraphs.

The pages are encrypted by the CTR cipher without padding. The AES CTR cipher
must be implemented by a cryptographic provider according to the NIST SP 800-38A specification. 

Unique nonces are generated for each ciphertext, with the nonce length of 12 bytes. All 12 

> bytes are constructed with an RBG option 1 as described for the AES_GCM_V1 algorithm. The data 

Reviewer: These 12-byte nonces are generated the same way for both algorithms, so it should be separate.

This section should detail how to pass the 12-byte nonce to CTR mode as a 16-byte IV.

> module encryption and decryption is performed with a 16 byte IV comprised of the nonce and a 4-byte 

Reviewer: Which bytes are the counter field?

Author: The last 4 bytes. We pass the initial counter value, as described in the text. Then, it will be incremented internally by the CTR cipher as it runs.

tools for on-premises deployment. Besides the diversity of management tools, there are many 
ways to generate and handle the keys themselves (generate Data keys inside KMS – or locally 
upon data encryption; use Data keys only, or use Master keys to encrypt/wrap the Data keys; 
store the wrapped key material inside the data file, or at a separate location; etc). There 
is also a large variety of authorization and certification methods, required to control the 
access to encryption keys.

Parquet is not limited to a single KMS, key generation/wrapping method, or authorization service. 
Instead, Parquet provides a developer with a simple interface that can be utilized for implementation 
of any key management scheme. For each column or footer key, a file writing code can pass an 
arbitrary `key_metadata` byte array that will be stored in the file. A file reading code can pass a 
key retrieval callback, that will invoked on the key_metadata byte array in order to recover the
encryption (or signature) key. For example, the key_metadata can keep a serialized

   * String ID of a Data encryption key (for direct key retrieval from a KMS).

>    * Wrapped Data key, and string ID of a Master key. The Data key is generated randomly and 

Reviewer: By "wrapped" do you mean encrypted?

Author: Yep. Will add this in the text.

Reviewer: Instead of adding synonyms for "encrypted", just use "encrypted". The more words you use to mean the same thing, the more confusing it is for implementers.

   wrapped either remotely in a KMS, or locally after retrieving the Master key from KMS. Wrapping 
   format depends on the KMS and can be a JSON string, or a base64 encoded byte array in a case of 
   local wrapping.

>    * Short ID (counter) of a key inside the Parquet data file. The Data key is wrapped with a 

Reviewer: I think the first two examples and the last one are sufficient. This one and the next aren't particularly valuable. In fact, the last one could be dropped as well for brevity.

Author: Unlike the second example, this one (third) allows for master key rotation without modifying the data file (footer), so might end up being the most useful among the three. Dropping the last two examples, and adding the key rotation point to the 2nd and 3rd.

   Master key using one of the options described above – but the resulting key material is stored 
   separately, outside the data file, and will be retrieved using the counter and file path.
   * Any of the three above, plus a string ID of the KMS instance (in case there are many).
   * Random string - useful for creation of footer keys in organizations not willing to authenticate 
   and connect all readers to a KMS. The footer key is generated as F(key_metadata), where F is an 
   algorithm unknown outside the organization. These keys are less secure than KMS-managed keys, but 
   better than using no keys at all in plaintext and unsigned footers (discussed in the sections 5.2 
   and 5.3.)
   
Key metadata can also be empty - in a case the encryption keys are fully managed by the caller 
code, and passed explicitly to Parquet for the footer and each encrypted column.

### 4.4 Additional Authenticated Data

> The AES GCM cipher in the basic mode protects against byte replacement inside a ciphertext, 

Reviewer: This should not use the term "basic mode". That was the "default" mode earlier, but both terms are not clear. Instead, if you need to refer to GCM without an AAD, just say "without passing AAD". That is specific and will not be misunderstood.

but can't prevent replacement of one ciphertext with another (encrypted with the same key). 
This can be solved by the AAD mode, using different AADs for different ciphertexts. Parquet 
modular encryption uses the AAD mode to protect against swapping ciphertext modules inside 

> a file, between files - or against swapping full files (for example, replacement of a file 

Reviewer: This should note that using AAD to protect against swapping full files is optional, and is not enabled by default because it requires both reader and writer to supply an AAD prefix.

by the user for the file, and an AAD_Suffix, built internally for each GCM-encrypted module 
inside the file. The AAD prefix should reflect the target identity that helps to detect file 
swapping (simple example - table name with a date and partition, e.g., "employees_23_05_2018.part0"). 
The AAD suffix reflects the internal identity of modules inside the file, which for example 
prevents replacement of column pages in row group 0 by pages from the same column in row 
group 1 (when columns are encrypted with the CGM cipher). The module AAD is a direct concatenation 
of the prefix and suffix parts.

#### 4.4.1 AAD_Prefix
A file writer passes an optional AAD_Prefix string upon file creation, that allows to differentiate 
it from other files. The reader should know this string apriori, or should be able to 
retrieve and verify it, using a convention accepted in the organization. An optional `aad_metadata` 
byte array can be specified in a file - to help a reader retrieve the AAD 
prefix string used for file enciphering. The aad_metadata  field can be empty, since readers might 
know apriori a right AAD_Prefix for each file. Alternatively, the aad_metadata  can contain hints 

> that help readers to get the right AAD prefix. Yet another option is to keep the AAD_Prefix itself 

Reviewer: This sentence, "aad_metadata can contain hints that help readers to get the right AAD prefix" is a duplicate of "to help a reader retrieve the AAD prefix string used for file enciphering" above.

inside the aad_metadata field – in that case, the readers must be able to verify it independently, 
since this field is not protected in a storage, and can be changed or filled by an attacker.

Here go a number of examples of AAD_Prefix creation and management in an organization:

>    * An organization uses a convention is to build an AAD_Prefix from the table name/ID, date and 

Reviewer: Quite a few examples here, you might consider removing some of them.

Author: Proper usage of AAD prefixes and aad_metadata might be challenging, so having a number of diverse examples is helpful.

Author: I think I can propose a major simplification of the AAD prefix management. Users won't have to do anything, except for make the writer generate and pass the AAD prefix (and make readers verify it belongs to a right dataset). Most examples become irrelevant, since Parquet will store and fully manage the AAD prefix itself (we'll still need an explanation on AAD prefix generation and verification).

Let me know if I miss anything:
AAD prefix can be stored inside the aad_metadata field. If an attacker replaces it, the file modules won't be readable, so its ok (files can always be corrupted, in many ways). However, if its stored as a plaintext, the attacker can learn the file identity (eg "customer table") and infer some info from its size (eg decreases from month to month) or date of modification. But we can encrypt the AAD prefix with the footer key (with CTR, or GCM without using an AAD), and store it in the `aad_metadata` field (to be renamed to `aad_prefix`). 

This is for encrypted footer mode. An open question is about plaintext footer mode. The file writers have a footer key (for footer signature creation), so can encrypt the AAD prefix. But this will require the readers of sensitive columns to have the footer signing key. Today its optional, because a reader might want to skip footer signature verification. We have two options:
- require readers of sensitive columns to always have the footer signing key (and always check footer integrity, which might be a good thing to do in any case)
- don't encrypt AAD prefix for files with plaintext footer. The footer fields are visible anyway, hence the attacker knows the schema etc anyway and can guess the file identity.

Author: Tomorrow, I'll start pushing the first pull requests in this round. They won't include anything we haven't agreed upon.  @rdblue @zivanfi let me know if the proposal above is ok with you. I believe the AADs are the topic that will be the hardest to grasp by future users. While we already handle the suffix part internally, it will be good to handle management of the prefix part too, so the users can focus only on its generation and verification, not on management of its storage or encryption.

Reviewer: I think that encrypting the AAD prefix sounds over-complicated. It requires using GCM in a different way or using CTR when everything else is GCM. That adds a lot of complexity to the spec. This also creates the issues that you outlined for plaintext footer mode.

I would prefer a simpler approach. The reason you are trying to protect the AAD prefix is assuming that it gives away information and identifies the file. If that's the case, then the user should track it separately. If it doesn't give away identifying information, then it is okay to store in plain text.

I think the easiest way to implement this is to have a flag for whether the prefix is stored in the file or not. If it isn't, then we throw an exception if it isn't supplied. If it is, then the user can query it and validate it matches the expected prefix.

We can change this later to a more complicated scheme, but I think it is a reasonable start. I'd rather do something simple and get this spec finished than spend a lot of time designing an optional feature like this one right now. What do you think?

Author: Sounds good. Actually, the files/folders are often named after the table identity, so encrypting the AAD prefix won't be sufficient. So, to sum this up:
- aad_metadata field is renamed to aad_prefix. AAD prefix (if passed by writer) will be stored there.  This removes prefix management complexity from basic  users. 
- Parquet will have a writer API option not to store the aad_prefix - for advanced users with high secrecy requirements (or basic users with advanced  frameworks). These users/frameworks will   track  prefixes separately, and also handle generation of eg random file names, along with overall table metadata management.

Question: do we need an explicit flag on whether the prefix is stored - or can use a boolean "if aad_prefix field is set in the Thrift structure"..?

Author: Ok, I retract the question:) We need to differentiate between when is prefix is not used, and when used but not stored.

   the reader should know it is fine, but if the aad_metadata stores "employees_23May2016.part0001" - 
   the version is wrong.
   * The AAD_Prefix is generated as a random string. Together with a file name, it is sent by the file 
   writer to a trusted metadata service, deployed in the organization. The reader, that needs to parse a 
   certain version of a table, authenticates the service and gets the list of table files and their AAD prefixes.
   * Frameworks above Parquet create table integrity tools that manage the file AAD prefixes. For example, 
   a framework table writer can create a signature file that contains the table ID, file list/number and 
   optional AAD prefixes. The AAD prefixes can be either explicit (eg random) or derived from 
   the table ID and file name/number. The signature file is signed with a secret key (private or symmetric), and 
   stored next to the table files, or in another location known to the readers. The 
   readers get the public or symmetric key, verify the signature file and get the AAD prefixes for the table files 
   (potentially, along with file names/paths).
   

> #### 4.4.2 AAD_Suffix

Reviewer: Why is this "AAD_Suffix" and not "aad_suffix"? I would prefer keeping it lower-case since that's used elsewhere. For example, "aad_metadata".

> File integrity can be disrupted by module swapping inside the file - such as replacement 

Reviewer: These sentences are written in a misleading way. They state that "file integrity can be disrupted by module swapping inside the file" first, and only later introduce the AAD_suffix to prevent it.

Instead, this should state that the purpose of the AAD_suffix is to prevent the following integrity attacks, then have a list of some of the swapping attacks. That way, the reader knows that this specification prevents those attacks.

Consider a similar change to the AAD_prefix section above.

of column pages in row group 0 by pages from the same column in row group 1. Also, if an encryption 
key is re-used in multiple files and the user has not provided a unique AAD_Prefix for each file – an 
attacker can swap modules between the files. While these attacks succeed under rare conditions and in 

> any case don't harm data confidentiality - they can be prevented by using an internally generated file 

Reviewer: They *are* prevented, at least in full GCM mode.

and module identity as a part of GCM AAD formation in Parquet. 

The AAD_Suffix is built by direct concatenation of the following parts: 

> 1.	[All modules] random byte array (file identifier): variable length

Reviewer: I think just referring to this as the "file identifier, a random byte array generated for each file of implementation-defined length" works.

2.	[All modules] module type: 1 byte
3.	[All modules except footer] row group ordinal: 2 byte short (little endian)
4.	[All modules except footer] column ordinal: 2 byte short (little endian)
5.	[Data page and header only]: page ordinal: 2 byte short (little endian)

The following module types are defined:  

   * Footer (0)
   * ColumnMetaData (1)
   * Data Page (2)
   * Dictionary Page (3)
   * Data PageHeader (4)
   * Dictionary PageHeader (5)
   * ColumnIndex (6)
   * OffsetIndex (7)

|                      |File ID     | Module type | Row group ordinal | Column ordinal | Page ordinal|
|----------------------|------------|-------------|-------------------|----------------|-------------|

> | Footer               |     V      |    V (0)    |         X         |       X        |      X      |

Reviewer: What do `V` and `X` indicate?

Reviewer: I would probably use a character to indicate it is used and blank to indicate it is not. `V` for a checkmark isn't clear.

Whatever characters you decide to use, the convention should be explained somewhere. Readers should never guess what something means in a spec.

}

union EncryptionAlgorithm {
  1: AesGcmV1 AES_GCM_V1
  2: AesGcmCtrV1 AES_GCM_CTR_V1
}
```
 

The Thrift modules are encrypted after serialization, using the GCM cipher. For each module, the encryption 
buffer is comprised of a nonce, ciphertext and tag, described in the Algorithms section. The column pages 
(data and dictionary) are encrypted after compression. With the AES_GCM_V1 algorithm, a page encryption 
buffer is comprised of a nonce, ciphertext and tag. The length of the encryption buffer 
(a 4-byte little endian) is written to the output stream, followed by the buffer itself.

|length (4 bytes) | nonce (12 bytes) | ciphertext (length-28 bytes) | tag (16 bytes) |
|-----------------|------------------|------------------------------|----------------|

With the AES_GCM_CTR_V1 algorithm, a page encryption buffer is comprised of a nonce and ciphertext, 
described in the Algorithms section. The length of the encryption buffer 
(a 4-byte little endian) is written to the output stream, followed by the buffer itself.

|length (4 bytes) | nonce (12 bytes) | ciphertext (length-12 bytes) |
|-----------------|------------------|------------------------------|

> A `crypto_meta_data` field is set in each ColumnChunk in the encrypted columns. ColumnCryptoMetaData 

Reviewer: I thought that the decision was to use "metadata" instead of "meta_data"?

Author: parquet-cpp has released the version 1.5.0 with these crypto structures.
https://github.com/apache/parquet-cpp/blob/apache-parquet-cpp-1.5.0/src/parquet/parquet.thrift#L708

While this version cant read files with encrypted footer, or encrypted columns in files with plaintext footer - it should be able to read plaintext columns in encrypted files with plaintext footer - as any legacy reader.

However, this means we cant rename a couple of fields, including this one. The cpp thrift above has:
```c
struct ColumnChunk {
  8: optional ColumnCryptoMetaData crypto_meta_data
```

Reviewer: I thought the point of field IDs was that we can rename fields. It may just work.

As for the 1.5.0 release of parquet-cpp, I don't think we intend to support files written with the encryption structures from that release. The spec was not approved.

And aren't we making a lot of other changes to the spec anyway? I would expect more than just this to break. Column metadata, for example, has moved.

Reviewer: I think IDs should work here.

is a union - the actual structure is chosen depending on whether the column is encrypted with the 
footer key, or with a column-specific key. For the latter, a key metadata can be specified.

```c
struct EncryptionWithFooterKey {
}

struct EncryptionWithColumnKey {
  /** Column path in schema **/
  1: required list<string> path_in_schema
  
  /** Retrieval metadata of the column-specific key **/

>   2: optional binary column_key_metadata

Reviewer: Should this be named "key_metadata" since it is already in a column-specific structure?

Author: Same as above, 
https://github.com/apache/parquet-cpp/blob/apache-parquet-cpp-1.5.0/src/parquet/parquet.thrift#L672

```c
struct RowGroup {
...
  /** Row group ordinal in the file **/
  7: optional i16 ordinal
}
```

### 5.1 Protection of column metadata
The Parquet file footer, and its nested structures, contain sensitive information - ranging 
from a secret data (column statistics) to other information that can be exploited by an 
attacker (e.g. schema, num_values, key_value_metadata, encoding 
and crypto_meta_data). This information is automatically protected when the footer and 
secret columns are encrypted with the same key. In other cases - when column(s) and the 
footer are encrypted with different keys; or column(s) are encrypted and the footer is not, 
an extra measure is required to protect the column-specific information in the file footer. 
In these cases, the `ColumnMetaData` structures are Thrift-serialized separately and encrypted 
 with the AES GCM cipher and a column-specific key, thus protecting the column stats and 
 other metadata. The encryption buffer is kept in an `optional binary encrypted_column_metadata` 
 field in the `ColumnChunk`.

```c
struct ColumnChunk {
...
  
  /** Column metadata for this chunk.. **/

>   3: optional ColumnMetaData meta_data

Reviewer: Do we know how older readers act when `meta_data` is null?

Reviewer: Nevermind, I see that `meta_data` is still required in plaintext footer mode. Glad to see you already caught it!

..

  /** Encrypted column metadata for this chunk **/
  9: optional binary encrypted_column_metadata
}
```

### 5.2 Encrypted footer mode
In files with sensitive column data, a good security practice is to encrypt not only the 
secret columns, but also the file footer metadata. This hides the file schema, 
number of rows, key-value properties, column sort order, names of the encrypted columns  
and metadata of the column encryption keys. 

> The columns encrypted with the same key as the footer leave the column metadata at the original 

Reviewer: To be clear, can you update this to "must leave"? I don't want this interpreted as optional when the key is identical.

location, `optional ColumnMetaData meta_data` in the `ColumnChunk` structure.  
This field is not set for columns encrypted with a column-specific key - instead, the `ColumnMetaData`
is Thrift-serialized, encrypted with the column key and written to the `encrypted_column_metadata` 
field in the `ColumnChunk` structure, as described in the section 5.1.

> A Thrift-serialized `FileCryptoMetaData` structure is written before the encrypted footer. 

Author: This should be visible in the figures I'm working on.

It contains information on the file encryption algorithm and on the footer key metadata. Then 
the combined length of this structure and of the encrypted footer is written as a 4-byte 
little endian integer, followed by a final magic string, "PARE". The same magic bytes are 
written at the beginning of the file (offset 0). Parquet readers start file parsing by 
reading and checking the magic string. Therefore, the encrypted footer mode uses a new 
magic string ("PARE") in order to instruct readers to look for a file crypto metadata 
before the footer - and also to immediately inform legacy readers (expecting ‘PAR1’ 
bytes) that they can’t parse this file.

```c
/** Crypto metadata for files with encrypted footer **/
struct FileCryptoMetaData {
  /** 
   * Encryption algorithm. Note that this field is only used for files
   * with encrypted footer. Files with plaintext footer store the algorithm id
   * inside footer (FileMetaData structure).
   */
  1: required EncryptionAlgorithm encryption_algorithm
    
  /** Retrieval metadata of key used for encryption of footer, 
   *  and (possibly) columns **/

>   2: optional binary footer_key_metadata

Reviewer: Should this be just `key_metadata` since it is in a footer-specific struct?

}
```

> <!-- 

Author: I guess this is the figure placeholder. I'll uncomment it when adding them back next week.

   * in FileCryptoMetaData structure.
   */
  8: optional EncryptionAlgorithm encryption_algorithm

  /** 
   * Set only for encrypted files with a plaintext footer. 
   * true if footer signature is written in the file. 
   */
  9: optional bool signed_footer

  /** 
   * Retrieval metadata of key used for signing the footer. 
   * Set only for encrypted files with a plaintext and signed footer. 
   */ 
  10: optional binary footer_signing_key_metadata
}
```
 
The `FileMetaData` structure is Thrift-serialized and written to the output stream.

The plaintext footer and an optional signature are followed by a 4-byte little endian integer 
that contains either the footer length - or a combined length of the footer and its 28-byte 
signature, if the footer is signed. A final magic string, "PAR1", is written at the end of the 
file. The same magic string is written at the beginning of the file (offset 0). The magic bytes 
for plaintext footer mode are ‘PAR1’ to allow legacy readers to read projections of the file 
that do not include encrypted columns.

<!-- 
 ![File Layout - Encrypted footer](doc/images/FileLayoutEncryptionPF.jpg)
   -->

 

> ### 5.4 New fields for vectorized readers

Reviewer: What broke that requires this?

I think this is an addition to the Parquet format, not to encryption. Why is it needed for encryption but not for normal vectorized reads? Can't total compressed size be inferred from page locations?

Also, `total_compressed_size` is misleading. It is total size on disk, not just the compressed size. Page buffers are compressed, but may also be encrypted. Page headers aren't compressed.

Author: This helps normal vectorized reads too - instead of looping on all column chunks, they can just read the row group size field.

The column chunk length is not available in files with encrypted footer (unless a reader has all column keys) - therefore, these new fields are required there.  It might be possible to reconstruct the size from page lengths and other available file metadata, but it wont be easy or elegant ( eg the row group offset is also unknown, so we wouldn't know where the pages start; its also not obvious where they end for each row group). 
I think adding these two fields is the right thing to do for both regular and encrypted files.

Regarding the name `total_compressed_size` - it copies an existing field in `ColumnMetaData` structure, called the same:
```c
/** total byte size of all compressed pages in this column chunk (including the headers) **/
  7: required i64 total_compressed_size
```

Author: regarding section 5.4 - we can replace it by adding a short text in section "5.2 Encrypted footer mode", explaining that these two fields must be set in RowGroup structures in files created in this mode.

Reviewer: > I think adding these two fields is the right thing to do for both regular and encrypted files

If that's the case, then we should add the fields to the spec as a separate change.

A reader can find the starting point of all of the columns it intends to read and work from there. Vectorized reads don't necessarily need a stopping point and that can be inferred most of the time.

I don't see a need to over-complicate this spec with this concern, let's do it separately.

Author: Ok.

adding up the size values and picking the offset of the first column as the row group offset. 
However, vectorization needs only a row group metadata, and not the metadata of individual 
columns. Also, in files written in an encrypted footer mode, the column metadata is not 
available to readers without the column key. Therefore, two new fields are added to the 
`RowGroup` structure - `file_offset` and `total_compressed_size` that are set upon file writing, 
and allow vectorized readers to query a file even if keys to certain columns are not 
available ('hidden columns'). Naturally, the query itself should not try to access the 
hidden column data.

```c
struct RowGroup {
...
  /** Byte offset from beginning of file to first page (data or dictionary)
   * in this row group **/
  5: optional i64 file_offset

  /** Total byte size of all compressed (and potentially encrypted) column data 
   *  in this row group **/
  6: optional i64 total_compressed_size
}
```

## 6. Encryption Overhead
The size overhead of Parquet modular encryption is negligible, since most of the encryption 
operations are performed on pages (the minimal unit of Parquet data storage and compression). 

> The overhead order of magnitude is adding 1 byte per each ~30,000 bytes of original compressed 

Reviewer: This is fine because it is a fact. But what is this based on?

Overhead is going to depend on the total size of data after encoding and compression. So overhead is dependent on the data that was written.

data.

The throughput overhead of Parquet modular encryption depends on whether AES enciphering is 
done in software or hardware. In both cases, performing encryption on full pages (~1MB buffers) 
instead of on much smaller individual data values causes AES to work at its maximal speed. 

> Preliminary tests show Parquet modular encryption throughput overhead to be up to a few 

Reviewer: A spec should not contain statements that will be outdated later as more data is gathered. The spec should not argue for itself to exist. It should simply and clearly state its requirements and little else.

2. Implement "client-side" encryption/decryption (storage client). The storage server 
must not see plaintext data, metadata or encryption keys.
3. Leverage authenticated encryption that allows clients to check integrity of the 
retrieved data - making sure the file (or file parts) have not been replaced with a 
wrong version, or tampered with otherwise.

> 4. Support column access control - by enabling different encryption keys for different 

Reviewer: As I noted above, this goal should be rephrased to state that columns can use different encryption keys. It should not claim to provide access control.

columns and for the footer.
5. Allow for partial encryption - encrypt only column(s) with sensitive data.
6. Work with all compression and encoding mechanisms supported in Parquet.
7. Support multiple encryption algorithms, to account for different security and 
performance requirements.
8. Enable two modes for metadata protection:
   * full protection of file metadata
   * partial protection of file metadata that allows legacy readers to access unencrypted 
 columns in an encrypted file.
9. Minimize overhead of encryption: in terms of size of encrypted files, and throughput
of write/read operations.

## Technical Approach

> Each Parquet module (footer, page headers, pages, column indexes, column metadata) is 

Reviewer: The use of "module" is confusing later because it isn't used elsewhere it Parquet documentation. Please add a definition instead of using it and defining it at the same time.

Parquet encryption algorithms are based on the standard AES ciphers for symmetric 
encryption. AES is supported in Intel and other CPUs with hardware acceleration of 
crypto operations (“AES-NI”) - that can be leveraged, for example, by Java programs 
(automatically via HotSpot), or C++ programs (via EVP-* functions in OpenSSL).

Initially, two algorithms have been implemented, one based on a GCM mode of AES, and the other 
on a combination of GCM and CTR modes.

AES-GCM is an authenticated encryption. Besides the data confidentiality (encryption), it 
supports two levels of integrity verification (authentication): of the data (default), and 
of the data combined with an optional AAD (“additional authenticated data”). The default 
authentication allows to make sure the data has not been tampered with. An AAD is a free 
text to be signed, together with the data. The user can, for example, pass the file name 
with its version (or creation timestamp) as the AAD, to verify that the file has not been 

> replaced with an older version (see below).

Reviewer: See what below? Which section? This should be a description, ideally with a link.

Reviewer: In the AAD section below, an AAD scheme is specified. If an AAD scheme is required, then the statement that the user can do something is false. This encryption spec requires that the AAD is used to authenticate streams such that no stream can be replaced. with one from a different file or moved.

Reviewer: From below:

> Parquet  modular encryption uses the AAD mode to protect against swapping ciphertext modules inside a file, between files - or against swapping full files (for example, replacement of a file with an old version)"

It is faster than AES-GCM, since it doesn’t perform integrity verification and doesn’t 
calculate the authentication tag. Actually, AES-GCM is a combination of AES-CTR and an 
authentication module called GMAC. For applications running without AES acceleration and 
willing to compromise on content verification, AES-CTR can provide a boost in Parquet 
write/read throughput. The second Parquet algorithm encrypts the data content (pages) 
with AES-CTR, and the metadata (Thrift structures) with AES-GCM. This allows to encrypt/decrypt 
the bulk of the data faster, while still verifying the metadata integrity and making sure 
the file has not been replaced with a wrong version. However, tampering with the page data 
might go unnoticed. 

The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 
since a single re-use of an IV breaks the encryption. An IV in these two modes is often called a 
nonce (“number used once”). Parquet encryption uses the RBG-based (random bit generator) IV 
construction as defined in the NIST SP 800-38D document for the GCM ciphers (section 8.2.2). 

### AES_GCM_V1

> All modules are encrypted by an AES-GCM cipher, without padding. Unique IVs are generated and 

Reviewer: Is the padding statement clear enough? Is there a reference we could point to that shows how to encrypt the last, under-filled block?

Author: I'm using the standard APIs for that, such as 
 `javax.crypto.Cipher.getInstance("AES/GCM/NoPadding");` in Java.
As for a reference, we can point to
https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/42412/gcm-padding-or-not
or
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/9/docs/api/javax/crypto/Cipher.html
or some other reference

Reviewer: The mode used for a Java library is not sufficient to document this. A reference for exactly what that mode does would be, if not a description here of how this is done.

Author: Yep, makes sense. I'll try to find one, or let me know if you come across something suitable.

Author: Ok, it looks like the most authoritative references for this are 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-38a.pdf
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3686

CTR is explicitly excluded from the list of padded ciphers in the former. The latter says:
"AES-CTR does not require the plaintext to be padded to a  multiple of the block size"

Also, we have these from different sources:

"because CTR mode (contrary to CBC mode) does not require padding to block boundaries, and AES-CTR would also be compatible with no padding at all, or with strict PKCS#5 padding"

"Internally GCM really is CTR mode along with a polynomial hashing function applied on the ciphertext. CTR-mode doesn't need padding because you can just partly use the bits the last counter block generated and the polynomial hash does use (zero-)padding."

"GCM is a streaming mode which means that the ciphertext is only as long as the plaintext (not including authentication tag). GCM doesn't require a padding. This means that the PKCS5Padding version is actually only a synonym for NoPadding for convenience during programming. Some providers don't have this strange mode."

So, while the NIST spec text is not great on this, the picture is clear. GCM/NoPadding implementations will be compatible in any language and crypto provider. Same is true for CTR/NoPadding.

Reviewer: I'm sure the modes work without padding.

The problem is that an implementer needs to know how to take the AES-GCM block cipher and produce ciphertext for the last block. The pseudo-code is something like this:

```java
val last_key_block = ...
val last_ciphertext_block = new byte[last_block.length]
for (i in range(0, last_block.length)) {
  last_ciphertext_block[i] = last_key_block[i] ^ last_block[i];
}
```

Author: The details of AES GCM and CTR ciphers are defined in the two NIST specs, 800-38D and 800-38A.
I believe an implementer doesn't need to know how the block ciphers are created. For all practical purposes, its sufficient for a Parquet encryption implementer to pick a provider that implements these two ciphers, with a 'no padding' option, according to the NIST specs. Using JCE, OpenSSL, BountyCastle or any other provider worth mentioning, would guarantee the parquet encryption interop.
Having said that - I agree the padding part is not verbalized very well in the NIST specs. If you feel its important we add these details to the spec, to remove any doubts about the requirements on  a provider implementation - lets do it.

Reviewer: Are there "no padding" modes for C++, Python, etc.? The libraries you mention are all JVM-based.

Author: OpenSSL is C++, we're using it in the parquet-cpp implementation. Tested for interop with the parquet-mr.
Anyways, adding the no-padding details to the spec.

Author: Starting to look at this, I've realized I'm not comfortable with providing details that are not provided in the NIST specifications for these ciphers. The reason NIST explicitly ignores padding for the CTR and GCM modes is likely to be this: _".. CTR modes do not require any special measures to handle messages whose lengths are not multiples of the block size, since the modes work by XORing the plaintext with the output of the block cipher"._
Therefore, I think we need to require from a Parquet implementer to use a cryptographic provider that implements these two ciphers according to the NIST specification. That will be sufficient to guarantee an interop. As an example, we already know the SunJCE and OpenSSL providers are interoperable, since we have tested this in the parquet-mr and parquet-cpp implementations.

Reviewer: Okay, then let's leave it at "no padding" then.

written before each ciphertext. The IV length is 12 
bytes (96 bits), which is generally considered to be the optimal size of GCM IVs.  The NIST 
specification requires a “random field” to fill all 12 bytes and an arbitrary “free field” to be empty for 
this IV length (see section 8.2.2). 

The authentication tags (16 bytes) are written after each ciphertext.

### AES_GCM_CTR_V1

> Thrift modules are encrypted with AES-GCM, as described above. The pages are encrypted by an AES-CTR

Reviewer: This mixes the layout for AES-GCM or AES-CTR with the Parquet modes, AES_GCM_v1 and AES_GCM_CTR_V1.

Those should be separate to be more clear for implementers. This should have a section for AES-GCM and AES-CTR that specifies the layout (CTR: IV, length, ciphertext; GCM: IV, length, ciphertext, auth tag) and a separate section that specifies the Parquet modes: AES_GCM_V1 that uses AES-GCM mode used for all encryption, and AES_GCM_CTR_V1 that uses AES-GCM mode for metadata structures and AES-CTR for page data.

> cipher without padding. The nonces are generated and written before each ciphertext, with the nonce length of 16 bytes 

Reviewer: Either "nonce" or "IV" should be used throughout the doc. Terminology should not change between GCM and CTR.

> (128 bits). At least 12 bytes out of 16 are constructed with an RBG.

Reviewer: Why are nonces and IVs different lengths? Why can't a 12-byte IV that is entirely generated with an RBG be used for CTR mode?

Reviewer: The links don't address my question. AES-GCM requires a 12-byte IV, to which a 4-byte counter is added to get the nonce for AES-CTR. Why doesn't the counter mode do the same and take an IV to which it adds the counter? Is this a quirk of the API for the AES-CTR library you're using, or is there a real difference between how the two are handled?

Author: It works like this:

1. **AES CTR**
requires a user to provide a 16 byte IV for each encryption operation [API call to convert n-byte plaintext into n-byte ciphertext - takes the following input parameters: key (16 bytes), IV (16 bytes), plaintext offset, and length n].

Per the quotes above, the IV can be constructed by the user in one of the two following ways:
a. First 12 bytes are random bytes, the other 4 are set to a value of 1.
b. All 16 bytes are random.

Inside, CTR implementation will use the last 4 bytes as a counter field when running over n bytes split into 16 byte chunks.

2. **AES GCM**
requires a user to provide a 12 byte IV (see NIST spec) for each encryption operation [API call to convert n-byte plaintext into n-byte ciphertext and 16-byte tag - takes the following input parameters: key (16 bytes), IV (12 bytes), plaintext offset, and length n].

Per the NIST spec section 8.2.2, the IV is constructed by the user as a 12-byte random array.

Inside, GCM runs a CTR cipher that gets a 16-byte IV, constructed from the 12-byte array provided by user, and extra 4 bytes provided by the GCM implementation itself. The CTR cipher then runs as described above ("will use the last 4 bytes as a counter field when running over n bytes split into 16 byte chunks").

Reviewer: Okay, then it sounds like the problem is just with the API that is used. One accepts a 12-byte IV and constructs a 16-byte IV+counter, the other accepts a 16-byte nonce where 12 bytes are an IV and it overwrites some bytes with the counter.

For Parquet, we don't need two formats. The encryption library should use the same 12-byte IV to construct a nonce that is acceptable for passing into AES-CTR if that API is different.

> ```c

Reviewer: Why is this thrift structure here? This shouldn't be in the AES_GCM_CTR_V1 section. It should be in a section that explains how to encode the Parquet mode that was used for the file, along with an optional AAD.

struct AesGcmV1 {
  /** Retrieval metadata of AAD prefix used for encryption of pages and structures **/
  1: optional binary aad_metadata
}

struct AesGcmCtrV1 {
  /** Retrieval metadata of AAD prefix used for encryption of structures **/
  1: optional binary aad_metadata
}

union EncryptionAlgorithm {
  1: AesGcmV1 AES_GCM_V1
  2: AesGcmCtrV1 AES_GCM_CTR_V1
}
```

### Additional Authenticated Data

The AES GCM cipher in the basic mode protects against byte replacement inside a ciphertext, 
but can't prevent replacement of one ciphertext with another (encrypted with the same key). 
This can be solved by the AAD mode, using different AADs for different ciphertexts. Parquet 
modular encryption uses the AAD mode to protect against swapping ciphertext modules inside a 
file, between files - or against swapping full files (for example, replacement of a file with an 
old version). Obviously, the AAD must reflect the identity of a file and of the modules inside 
the file. 

Parquet constructs a module AAD from two components: an optional AAD prefix - a string provided 

> by the user for the file, and an AAD suffix, built internally for each encrypted module inside 

Reviewer: For each AES-GCM encrypted module.

the file. The AAD prefix should reflect the target identity that helps to detect file swapping - 
for example, table name and version or date / timestamp (e.g., "employees_23_05_2018"). The 
AAD suffix reflects the internal identity of modules inside the file, which for example prevents 

> replacement of column pages in row group 0 by pages from the same column in row group 1. The module 

Reviewer: Instead of "pages" use "AES-GCM ciphertext" because pages may use AES-CTR.

AAD is a direct concatenation of the prefix and suffix parts. 

#### AAD prefix

A file writer passes an AAD prefix string upon file creation, that allows to differentate it from other
files and datasets. The reader should know this string apriori, or should be able to retrieve and verify

> it, using a convention accepted in the organization.

Reviewer: Why not generate a random AAD prefix?

If Parquet relies on users to supply a prefix, then it allows the case where files are not protected by an AAD or where files use the same AAD. That allows attackers to swap ciphertext streams when the user has been lazy or doesn't understand the purpose of the AAD.

A random AAD prefix would ensure that ciphertext cannot be moved between files and the AAD suffix ensures that ciphertext cannot be moved between row groups or columns.

Reviewer: Another alternative is to allow users to pass a prefix, but to add a random portion to the suffix that makes the file AADs unique.

Author: Random AAD prefix is possible, but requires a trusted service where these prefixes are stored for every file. A reader must be able to retrieve an AAD prefix for every file. Since the data storage is untrusted (thats why we use the keys and AADs in the first place), the AAD prefixes must be stored in a secure location, and serviced by an authenticated process.
Unlike keys, AADs are not secret. Hence, having a "well known" method of AAD prefix creation (such as \<table name\>\_\<date\> or \<table name\>\_\<version\>) allows writers and readers to create/verify the file AAD prefix without a remote service.
Still, I'll add your suggestion as an example of possible AAD prefixes and their store/fetch service.

Author: AAD prefix is not necessarily stored in the aad_metadata. The "well known" method approach, described above, doesn't require setting the aad_metadata at all. But I agree it does require smart users, that can generate and verify unique AAD prefixes. Dumb users should work with a trusted service that keeps the random AAD prefixes created for each file. I'll add this to the text (maybe avoiding the dumb/smart terminology :). Similar to key metadata section, we'll have a number of example usages of the aad metadata field.

Author: btw, the random AAD prefix won't be stored in aad_metadata - no point, because aad_metadata is unprotected/untrusted, and a reader doesn't have a way to verify it other than to go to an authenticated service and get a correct AAD prefix for this file.

Author: Thinking of this, there is an additional option: get a descriptive prefix from the user, add a random part to it to make it truly unique (as you suggested) - and send it to a trusted service to hash/sign it with an asymmetric private key. The result is sent back to the file writer, and stored inside the aad_metadata field. The file reader will have the certificate with  the public key, that can be used to very the AAD prefix stored in the file. The reader will use the "descriptive" part to make sure it is the file it needs.
Its a kind of an intermediate option - it still demands a trusted service, but no need in storing all AADs there for each file, the service just signs the AADs and sends them back. It also still requires some smarts on the user part (both writer and reader), to create a good "descriptive prefix".

Author: A problem with this intermediate approach - say somebody (maliciously or not) creates a new file with the same descriptive AAD prefix part (and a different random part), and gets it signed. Then the original file can be replaced by this one, and it will pass the reader checks.
So we're back to the two main options: smart users with descriptive unique AAD prefixes and no service overhead; or dumb users with random AAD prefixes and a trusted storage service.

Reviewer: That sounds complicated.

What we really need is to ensure that there is some unique random string for each file, and to allow the user to add an additional AAD string. If the user can add to the AAD, then there is no need to hide the unique random. Anything that requires a secret AAD portion can be done in the user section.

How about this: let's leave `aad_metadata` as it is for user metadata and add a per-file unique to the `EncryptionAlgorithm` structs, called `aad_file_unique`. Then each AES-GCM stream would concatenate `aad_metadata`, `aad_file_unique`, and the AAD suffix to form each AAD.

That ensures that blocks can't be swapped between files and allows the user to have custom AAD content that is stored in the file or not.

Reviewer: I think there's also confusion about whether the per-file random can be public or not. It can be. The attack that it prevents is swapping data encrypted with the same key from another file. If each file has a different per-file random portion of its AAD, then AES-GCM encrypted pages from other files can't be swapped in.

Author: Yep, lets start this discussion from the scratch. Lets also presume for a second that we don't have the aad_metadata field (which seems to be a source of confusion). 
1. In our storage, we have two encrypted Parquet files, "employees_10_2017" and "employees_May_2018"
2. An attacker breaches our storage and runs `cp employees_10_2017 employees_10_2018`
3. We need to run a query on the latest version of employee table - which we know is written at the end of each month, therefore we know it should be the Oct 2018 version.
4. Without AADs, the attack makes us run query on a wrong, year old table version.
5. But if we use a string "employees_MON_YEAR" as the AAD, then the attack fails. 
6. The writer knows the AAD is "employees_OCT_2018", because it writes the table on the day of 31 Oct 2018.
7. The reader knows the AAD is "employees_OCT_2018", because it runs on the day of 9 Nov 2018, and knows the most recent table was written on 31 Oct 2018.
8. We don't need "aad_metadata" for any of these. Moreover, aad_metadata is unprotected in the file, therefore putting "employees_OCT_2018" there won't help, as this can easily be modified by an attacker.
9. "aad_metadata" has some uses (mentioned in the text), but I'm starting to think maybe they don't justify the cost of confusion caused by this field. We'll either drop this field entirely, or write a very clear and detailed section on its purpose.

Author: The example above describes the "smart user" scenario (because both writer and reader know the AAD without a help from any service. They just use a convention "well known" in the organization for table AAD creation). Here goes the "dumb user" scenario - which also doesn't require the aad_metadata field.
5. We use a random string as the file AAD.
6. Writer generates a random string and uses it as an AAD for the file. It also sends the table  name ("employees"),  month of creation, "10_\<CURRENT_YEAR\>", and the generated AAD, to a trusted AAD service. It might also send the file name ("employees_10_\<CURRENT_YEAR\>).
7. Reader runs on the day of 9 Nov 2018 - it goes to the trusted AAD service, and asks for the AAD for the latest version of employees table. The service sends the AAD, and the file name. The reader opens the file, using the AAD to verify its authenticity.
8. As before, we don't need "aad_metadata" for any of these. Putting the random AAD in this field or elsewhere in the file is not safe, can be modified by attacker.

Reviewer: The attack I'm addressing is slightly different. In this scenario, users don't know about supplying an AAD. User AAD metadata is empty in the 2017 version and the 2018 version.

The suffix part of the AAD is used to prevent pages from being swapped, so I can't overwrite row group 0 column 1 page 3 with row group 0 column 1 page 4.

But there isn't anything that prevents an attacker from replacing row group 0 column 1 page 4 with the same page from the 2017 version of the file. A per-file unique that is stored in the file would prevent page swapping between any 2 files, even if the unique string is in the file metadata.

This would not protect against copying 2017 over 2018 like your example, but it does at least ensure the pages a file has not been tampered with, in relation to each other.

Reviewer 2: I find the described scenarios a bit oversimplied. Of course, one can use Parquet in the way desribed (separate Parquet files for each month each being read explicitly), but I think in the much more common scenario a directory of Parquet files will correspond to a table without a one-to-one mapping between files and meaningful attributes like months.

When one uses MapReduce or RDD to process big data, different parts of the dataset get processed and written by different machines of the cluster. Instead of writing the data to a single file, each machine writes to a separate file. The individual file names don't even matter.

Additionally, when more data is written to the same table, it is not appended to existing files but new files get added. Impala can't even write arbitrary amount of data into a single Parquet file, it starts a new one for each block instead.

Could the discussed integrity checking measures be used to protect against (partial or full) file-swapping/duplicating/deleting attacks in such a scenario?

Author: Yep, the PARQUET-1457 addresses this scenario. As for the AAD prefix section in this doc - I'm currently updating it with more details - with the same focus on integrity of individual files, since Parquet API (ParquetFileWriter and ParquetFileReader)  is designed for writing/reading individual files. Data sets (tables, dataFrames, etc) are handled by frameworks above Parquet. The data set integrity can be handled by framework tools, with or without PARQUET-1457 help. I'll mention this in the doc.

For example, if the convention is to use a table name and date as the AAD prefix, a 
writer of a May 23 version of an employee table will use "employees_23_05_2018" as an AAD 
prefix (and as the file name). The reader that needs to process the May 23 table, knows the AAD must be 
"employees_23_05_2018", without relying on the name of the encrypted file.

The `AesGcmV1` and `AesGcmCtrV1` structures contain an optional `aad_metadata` field that can 
be used by a reader to retrieve the AAD prefix string used for file enciphering. The maximal allowed

> length of `aad_metadata` is 512 bytes. If organization works with a number of different 

Reviewer: Why is this limited to 512 bytes? Is this a restriction from AES-GCM?

Author: No good reason, actually, except for an effort to limit an input into this free-form byte array. If this is not the right way/place to do it, I'll remove this text.

Reviewer: Let's remove it. No need for arbitrary limitations that could require work-arounds in the future.

can be "MM_DD_YY" - then the reader will know the AAD prefix is "employees_05_23_18".

Alternatively, the `aad_metadata` can contain the AAD prefix itself. In this case, the reader must be able
to verify its validity. For example, if the AAD prefix stored in `aad_metadata` is "employees_23May2018", 
the reader should know it is fine, but if the `aad_metadata` stores "employees_23May2016" - the version is wrong.

#### AAD suffix

Sometimes, a number of encrypted columns have their file offset either directly visible or 
possible to infer from other metadata. This might be exploited for 
attacks on file integrity (such as replacement of column pages in row group 0 by pages from the same 
column in row group 1). While these attacks succeed under rare conditions and in any case don't harm data 
confidentiality - they can be prevented by using the column and row group identity as a part of GCM AAD 
formation. Therefore, the `PageHeader` structures and the pages (in case of AES_GCM_V1) are enciphered using 
an AAD suffix built by direct concatenation of two parts: the row group offset in the file (8 bytes, little endian) 

> and the column name (for nested columns, a concatenated path with "." separator) serialized with the UTF-8 charset.

Reviewer: An AAD suffix constructed this way could go over the size. Why not use column ordinal, which is required by Parquet to match the order in the file schema?

I think the suffix should be made from a per-file random, row group ordinal, column ordinal, and an id for the type of structure encrypted (e.g., data page, data page header, etc.)

Author: The limit on AAD size is in gigabytes, so the column name and row group offset are ok. The ordinals can also work, but they require extra code, and also can't be verified directly since they are not kept in the protected structures such as ColumnMetadata and RowGroup.
We'll add per-file random and the structure type.

Author: Checked the code - the column ordinal will be feasible, as both readers and writers have a simple loop on column chunks. I agree this will save the path String concatenation and serialization. We need to decide whether to use 2 or 4 bytes for the column ordinal component in AAD suffixes. Is there a limit on the number of columns? Is 32K enough?

The situation with row groups is different. In readers, the RowGroup list is filtered inside the FileMetaData structure, before being processed by a higher level code. Therefore, we can't rely on the list/loop count. 
On the other hand, the cost of serialization of 8 byte longs is basically as negligible as the cost of serialization of 4 byte ints or 2 byte shorts. Therefore, we can use the row group offset (kept inside RowGroup structures) as a part of AAD suffix. 
Or we can add an i32 or i16 "ordinal" field to the RowGroup structure. 
I'm fine with either option, let me know your preference.

Reviewer: 32k sounds like enough to me.

I'm fine either adding an ordinal or using the offset. I slightly prefer ordinal since it sounds generally useful. And a 2-byte ordinal would work here, too.

with its version (or creation timestamp) as the AAD, to verify that the file has not been 
replaced with an older version.

Sometimes, a hardware acceleration of AES is unavailable (e.g. in Java 8). Then AES crypto 
operations are implemented in software, and can be somewhat slow, becoming a performance 
bottleneck in certain workloads. AES-CTR is a regular (not authenticated) cipher.
It is faster than AES-GCM, since it doesn’t perform integrity verification and doesn’t 
calculate the authentication tag. Actually, AES-GCM is a combination of AES-CTR and an 
authentication module called GMAC. For applications running without AES acceleration and 
willing to compromise on content verification, AES-CTR can provide a boost in Parquet 
write/read throughput. The second Parquet algorithm encrypts the data content (pages) 
with AES-CTR, and the metadata (Thrift structures) with AES-GCM. This allows to encrypt/decrypt 
the bulk of the data faster, while still verifying the metadata integrity and making sure 
the file has not been replaced with a wrong version. However, tampering with the page data 
might go unnoticed. 

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 

Reviewer 2: Okay, so I just realized that since the IV is stored in the EncryptionAlgorithm and the EncryptionAlgorithm is stored in the FileCryptoMetaData, it means that there is only a single IV for a whole Parquet file. This seems problematic to me, because:
- Either we chain all blocks together, in which case one IV is enough, but we can not decrypt parts of the file without decryipting every block that preceeds it;
- Or we reuse the same IV multiple times, in which case we can selectively decrypt parts of the file, but identical data will lead to identical ciphertexts, weakening the encryption (e.g., if two pages contain the same data).

Do I misunderstand something?

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 

Author: Hi Zoltan, have to run now, so will address this comment only, and the others tomorrow morning. We don't keep IVs in the EncryptionAlgorithm. We used to have a so-called iv_prefix for 8.2.1 - but we don't anymore, as per our discussion. Please check the Thrift structures in the doc - iv_prefix'es dont show up there. Once the doc  is signed off, I'll send a pr removing these fields from parquet.thrift.
In any case - we have a fresh IV/nonce for each ciphertext (structure or page) in a file.

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 

Reviewer 2: Great, thanks for the clarification. Just noticed the sentence "The IVs are written before each ciphertext.", sorry for not noticing it earler. Maybe you could make this a bit more explicit by saying that a new, unique IV is generated for every ciphertext and maybe also mention exactly how they are generated (using random number generation).

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 

Reviewer 2: You could also add some diagrams to the corresponding sections like so:

IV (12 bytes) | ciphertext | authentication tag (16 bytes)
------------ | ------------- | -------------

and so:

nonce (16 bytes) | ciphertext
------------ | -------------

Oh, and one more important thing: please explcitily specify the byte order of the raw byte sequences.

> The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, 

Reviewer: Zoltan is right. This states that the IV is unique for each key: "The initialization vectors (IVs) in AES GCM and CTR ciphers must be unique for each encryption key, since a single re-use of an IV breaks the encryption."

An IV must be unique for each encrypted stream. The key stream for each IV is identical, so I can take two encrypted streams with the same IV and XOR them to get the plain-text XORed together. If I can control or predict one of the plain-text streams, then I can decrypt without the key.

All modules are encrypted by an AES-GCM cipher, without padding. The authentication tags (16 bytes) are 
written after each ciphertext. The IVs are written before each ciphertext. The IV length is 12 
bytes (96 bits), which is generally considered to be the optimal size of GCM IVs.  The NIST 
specification requires a “random field” to fill all 12 bytes and an arbitrary “free field” to be empty for 
this IV length (see section 8.2.2).

### AES_GCM_CTR_V1
Thrift modules are encrypted with AES-GCM, as described above. The pages are encrypted by an AES-CTR
cipher without padding. The nonces are written before each ciphertext, with the nonce length of 16 bytes 
(128 bits). At least 12 bytes out of 16 are constructed with an RBG.

```c
struct AesGcmV1 {
  /** Retrieval metadata of AAD used for encryption of pages and structures **/
  1: optional binary aad_metadata
}

struct AesGcmCtrV1 {
  /** Retrieval metadata of AAD used for encryption of structures **/
  1: optional binary aad_metadata
}

union EncryptionAlgorithm {
  1: AesGcmV1 AES_GCM_V1
  2: AesGcmCtrV1 AES_GCM_CTR_V1
}
```

The `AesGcmV1` and `AesGcmCtrV1` structures contain an optional `aad_metadata` field that can 

> be used by a reader to retrieve the AAD string used for file encryption. The maximal allowed

Reviewer 2: This basically says "There is an AAD field to store the AAD." You could briefly explain what the purpose of that field is. If my understanding is correct, that would be something like this:

```suggestion
be used to store any user-defined Additional Authenticated Data. The AAD itself is not
encrypted, but it is attached to the ciphertext in a tamperproof manner. The maximal allowed
```

```

The `AesGcmV1` and `AesGcmCtrV1` structures contain an optional `aad_metadata` field that can 
be used by a reader to retrieve the file AAD string used for file enciphering. The maximal allowed
length of `aad_metadata` is 512 bytes. Typically, readers would know the file AAD without relying
on this field, using instead a method adopted by the organization. For example, the AAD can be the name of 
the file - if constructed with a timestamp or version number, the AAD will allow readers to make sure they
work with a correct file version. If organization works with a number of different 

> AAD construction methods, the `aad_metadata` can contain the method ID; otherwise, the `aad_metadata` can

Reviewer 2: Why did you remove the sentence that the AAD itself must not be kept in this field? I think that was one of the most important points. In fact, I think you should elaborate on that and describe the intended use of this field. If I understand correctly: if there are multiple AADs in use, we need a way to decide which one to use in each case. Storing some kind of ID or reference to the AAD in this field solves this purpose. Is this the intended use case? Is there any other one? Please describe them here briefly.

Author: Turns out there is a usecase where it might make sense to store the AAD in this field. Say we have a dataset with 3 files: customers_ny_oct18, customers_pa_oct18 and customers_ct_oct18. We can store these strings as AADs in the 'aad_metadata' field - as long as the reader knows it must get Oct18 version and checks for "customer_??_oct18" AADs. The main message is in the last part - a reader must know what dataset it needs, and what AADs should be there. I'm adding a section on AADs to the doc.

The `AesGcmV1` and `AesGcmCtrV1` structures contain an optional `aad_metadata` field that can 
be used by a reader to retrieve the AAD string used for file encryption. The maximal allowed
length of `aad_metadata` is 512 bytes. Typically, readers would know the file AAD without relying
on this field, using instead a method adopted by the organization. For example, the AAD can be the name of 
the file - if constructed with a timestamp or version number, the AAD will allow readers to make sure they
work with a correct file version. If organization works with a number of different 
AAD construction methods, the `aad_metadata` can contain the method ID. In any case, the AAD string itself

> must not be kept in this field - a reader reliance on this AAD will defy the cipher authentication purpose.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this last sentece, could you please explain it?

Author: Yep, the wording is not clear enough, I'll re-write this sentence. The point is as follows: say we have a claims processor that needs to run a query on yesterday's data, making sure it had not been replaced with an older data. The query will specify the AAD based on the expected file name: abcd_<yesterday date>. There is no point in keeping this AAD in the file itself - because it  can be tampered with / replaced - but mostly because the reader should know apriori what data version (date) it looks for.

Reviewer 2: I had to do some research to understand this, it turned out I had mistunderstood AAD earlier. I would propose a decription along the following lines: First state how AAD is used _conventionally_ (AAD is not stored alongside the ciphertext, the ciphertext can only be decrypted when the AAD is provided to the decryption algorithm, essentially behaves like a second password but is used for an entirely different purpose). Then explain that in Parquet we do store the AAD as well (emphasizing that it is not the usual practice), because it allows more flexibility:
- Readers that don't care about checking integrity can still read the data without providing an AAD, since they can read it from the file itself.
- Readers that want integrity checking can provide an expected AAD and encryption will fail unless the same AAD was used for encryption (thereby ensuring integrity).
- Readers that provide multiple AADs can first check whether the stored value is amongst the provided AADs and then do the integrity check using that single AAD instead of trying to decrypt the data using all providedf AADs.

Since this does not seem to be the usual practice, please also explain why storing the AAD does not degrade its security.

Reviewer 2: Ah, okay, so reading your description once more, it seems that I misunderstood again. :) The fields should not store the AAD itself, just some way to identify it (select which one to use).

tag, as described in the Algorithms section. Only the buffer is written to the output 
stream - no need to write the length of the buffer, since the length (page size after
compression and encryption) is kept in the page headers.

A `crypto_meta_data` field is set in each `ColumnChunk` in the encrypted columns. 
`ColumnCryptoMetaData` is a union - the actual structure is chosen depending on whether the 
column is encrypted with the footer key, or with a column-specific key. For the latter, 
a key metadata can be specified, with a maximal length of 512. Key metadata is a free-form
byte array that can be used by a reader to retrieve the encryption key (see next subsection). 

```c
struct EncryptionWithFooterKey {
}

struct EncryptionWithColumnKey {
  /** Column path in schema **/
  1: required list<string> path_in_schema
  
  /** Retrieval metadata of the column-specific key **/
  2: optional binary column_key_metadata
}

union ColumnCryptoMetaData {
  1: EncryptionWithFooterKey ENCRYPTION_WITH_FOOTER_KEY
  2: EncryptionWithColumnKey ENCRYPTION_WITH_COLUMN_KEY
}

struct ColumnChunk {
...
  /** Crypto metadata of encrypted columns **/

>   8: optional ColumnCryptoMetaData crypto_meta_data

Reviewer 2: (nit) Just noticed that this field is named *_meta_data, while other structs use *_metadata. You may consider renaming this field here and in the proto itself.

Author: just noticed that the current FileMetaData structure has a field named key_value_metadata. So there are already metadata and meta_data fields..

Reviewer: This change still needs to be made.

|length (4 bytes) | IV (12 bytes) | ciphertext (`length` bytes) | tag (16 bytes) |
|-----------------|---------------|-----------------------------|----------------|

The column pages (data and dictionary) are encrypted after compression. For each page, 
the encryption buffer is comprised of an IV (nonce), ciphertext and (in case of AES_GCM_V1) of a 
tag, as described in the Algorithms section. Only the buffer is written to the output 
stream - no need to write the length of the buffer, since the length (page size after
compression and encryption) is kept in the page headers.

| IV (12 bytes) | ciphertext (`page_size` bytes) | tag (16 bytes) |
|---------------|--------------------------------|----------------|

or 

| IV (16 bytes) | ciphertext (`page_size` bytes) | 
|---------------|--------------------------------|

Sometimes, a number of encrypted columns have their file offset either directly visible or 
possible to infer from other metadata. This might be exploited for an exotic
attack on file integrity (such as swapping dictionary pages of two columns). While these
attacks succeed under rare conditions and in any case don't harm data confidentiality - 

> they can be prevented by using the offset as a part of the GCM AAD formation. Therefore,

Reviewer 2: The offset of the very first page of every Parquet file is the same. Does this mean that a malicious person can swap the first pages of two Parquet files without knowing the encryption key?

Author: Nope, this won't work, but another attack might: replacement of column pages in row group 0 by pages from the same column in row group 1.

written to the output stream, followed by the buffer itself.

The column pages (data and dictionary) are encrypted after compression. For each page, 
the encryption buffer is comprised of an IV (nonce), ciphertext and (in case of AES_GCM_V1) of a 
tag, as described in the Algorithms section. Only the buffer is written to the output 
stream - no need to write the length of the buffer, since the length (page size after
compression and encryption) is kept in the page headers.

> 

Author: PageHeaders (and Pages in case of GCM cipher) are encrypted with an AAD concatenated from column offset and user-supplied AAD (if present). I'll add description.

   * String ID of a Data encryption key (for key retrieval from KMS).
   * Wrapped Data key, and string ID of a Master key.  The Data key is generated randomly and 
   wrapped either remotely in a KMS, or locally after retrieving the Master key from KMS. 
   Wrapping format depends on the KMS and can be a JSON string, or a base64 encoded byte array 
   in a case of local wrapping.
   * Short ID (counter) of a key inside the Parquet data file. The Data key is wrapped with a Master 
   key using one of the options described above – but the resulting key material is stored separately, 
   outside the data file, and will be retrieved using the counter and file path.
   * Any of the three above, plus a string ID of the KMS instance (in case there are many).
   * Random string (useful for creation of footer keys in organizations not willing to 
   authenticate and connect all readers to a KMS. The footer key is generated as F(key_metadata), 
   where F is an algorithm unknown outside organization. These keys are less secure than 
   KMS-managed keys, but better than using no keys at all in plaintext footers, see a discussion below).

> 

Author: Key metadata can also be empty (not set) - in case the keys are fully managed by the caller code, and passed explicitly to Parquet for the footer and each encrypted column. I'll add this to the text.

   **/
  3: optional ColumnMetaData meta_data
..
}
```

### Encrypted footer mode

In files with sensitive column data, a good security practice is to encrypt not only the 
secret columns, but also the file footer metadata with a separate footer key. This hides
the file schema / column names, number of rows, key-value properties, column sort order, 
column data offset and size, list of encrypted columns and metadata of the column encryption keys. 
It also makes the footer tamper-proof.

The columns encrypted with the same key as the footer don't separate the ColumnMetaData from the 
ColumnChunks, leaving it at the original location, `optional ColumnMetaData meta_data`. This field
is not set for columns encrypted with a column-specific key.

A Thrift-serialized `FileCryptoMetaData` structure is written after the footer. It contains 
information on the file encryption algorithm and on the footer (offset in 
the file, and an optional key metadata, with a maximal length of 512). Then 
the length of this structure is written as a 4-byte little endian integer, followed by a final 
magic string, "PARE".
The same magic bytes are written at the beginning of the file (offset 0).

> Parquet readers start file parsing by reading and checking the magic string. Therefore, the encrypted footer mode uses a new magic string ("PARE") in order to immediately inform legacy readers (expecting ‘PAR1’ bytes) that they can’t parse this file.

Reviewer 2: I would say the purpose of a different magic string is not to inform legacy reader that they can't read the file (they would fail anyway), but instead to inform new readers to look for a file crypto metadata at the end of the file instead of a footer.

Author: Agreed, this is the main reason. Still, having an early and clear exception in legacy readers, informing of a wrong file type (instead of a more obscure exception later on) is helpful too. I'll update the text accordingly.

Algorithms section. The length of the encryption buffer (a 4-byte little endian) is 

> written to the output stream, followed by the buffer itself.

Reviewer: This statement disagrees with the length definition below. This states that the encryption buffer is the IV, ciphertext and tag and that the length written is the length of the encryption buffer. The diagram states that the ciphertext is "`length` bytes".

My comment about moving the length assumes that the length is for the ciphertext, not the whole encryption buffer. Length should be placed directly before the bytes that it applies to. So it's current position is fine if it is the length of the encryption buffer. If it is the length of the ciphertext, then it should be just before the ciphertext.

> |length (4 bytes) | IV (12 bytes) | ciphertext (`length` bytes) | tag (16 bytes) |

Reviewer: +1 for including this diagram.

Why is IV between length and ciphertext? I think IV should come before length. Otherwise, it isn't clear that length is the ciphertext length and not the length of IV, ciphertext, and tag, or for CTR, just IV and ciphertext.

|-----------------|---------------|-----------------------------|----------------|

The column pages (data and dictionary) are encrypted after compression. For each page, 
the encryption buffer is comprised of an IV (nonce), ciphertext and (in case of AES_GCM_V1) of a 
tag, as described in the Algorithms section. Only the buffer is written to the output 
stream - no need to write the length of the buffer, since the length (page size after
compression and encryption) is kept in the page headers.

> | IV (12 bytes) | ciphertext (`page_size` bytes) | tag (16 bytes) |

Reviewer: I would rather have length of the ciphertext stored in all cases so that these are always the same. The overhead isn't that high.

Reviewer: Can you describe an integrity attack that uses this information?

In general, if you're worried about the length of the ciphertext giving away information, I think you should be addressing that directly.

Author: E.g. page swapping attacks - but mostly the attacks we don't know about today, its impossible to foresee all possible future attacks. Given two options - one that hides the position/size of every ciphertext (with its IVs, tags, etc), at no cost - and one that exposes them all, with storage overhead  - we should choose the first one, unless there is a very strong reason not to.

Reviewer: AES-GCM and AADs are used to avoid page swapping attacks.

I would rather all encryption buffers be stored the same way, but I don't have a strong opinion here.

@julienledem or @zivanfi: do you have an opinion?

Reviewer 2: @rdblue I am not crypto expert, I can't form a well-founded opinion on whether storing the offset and size of pages in plain text can be exploited.

Reviewer: Block lengths do probably give away information. Because Parquet uses run-length encoding, it can produce very short pages, like 12 bytes. So if you see a page that is only 12 bytes, it is probably encoding a run of the same value.

That said, removing the lengths helps only marginally. IVs can be constructed by taking a previous IV and updating it: "the result of applying the r(i)–bit incrementing function to the random field of the preceding IV for the given key". That means that IVs will be strictly unique but similar enough to one another that it is possible to identify them in the bytes of a file and recover the lengths anyway.

Being able to recover the length even if we don't write it is the reason why it is better to deal with the problem directly: if the length of the plaintext should be hidden, then we should use padding to hide it.

I don't think we need padding to hide the length of plaintext pages. Some information is leaked, but an attacker doesn't know what value is repeated or how many rows are in a page. I don't think this is a large concern.

Given that we can probably recover buffer lengths, then I'd like to add the length for encrypted pages. All encrypted buffers should have the same structure.

Author: Good point, but the NIST spec defines two modes of RGB creation: "The random field shall either consist of 1) an output string of r(i) bits from an approved RBG with a sufficient security strength, or 2) the result of applying the r(i)–bit incrementing function to the random field of the preceding IV for the given key".
I'm using the option 1), running SecureRandom for each IV (this class is cryptographically secure, and very fast, see forum discussions. I get gigabytes/sec encryption speeds with it). Following your suggestion, lets make this explicit in the doc, and require the Parquet IVs to be created with option 1 only of NIST 800-38D RGB spec. Since option 2 indeed might leak the positions.

In addition to your example of an attack based on known page positions/sizes, let me give another one. In AES_GCM_CTR Parquet algorithm, the pages are not protected with AADs. If their offset/size is unknown, its hard for an attacker to swap them without triggering an alert (exception) in readers. However, the known offset/size makes it easy to mount an undetected attack.

I'm sure there are many more examples how the offset/size leakage makes the data less safe. If we had to make an effort to hide them, we would've considered whether to make it or not. But that's not the case - out of box, we already have a neat mechanism that automatically hides this information at no additional cost. I suggest we don't make an effort to break it, by duplicating the length field - copying it from a protected location (encrypted PageHeader) into an additional plaintext field - that will be used by nobody but an attacker.

Reviewer: I'm okay with using option 1 for all IVs.

For the encrypted buffer for pages though, an attacker can still recover page lengths. Page headers and page buffers are interspersed in the file. Because the page header must have a length, an attacker can identify where each encrypted page header starts and work backward from there.

I think hiding the lengths amounts to security through obscurity and makes this spec harder to implement. If we want to hide the length of the plaintext (and I don't), then padding is the right way to do that.

Author: I'm not sure I understood the last sentence - hiding the length of the plaintext, and padding.

Reviewer: The attacks you're trying to prevent here involve guessing information about the encrypted data using the length of the plaintext.

My main point is that if you don't want an attacker to know the length of the plaintext, you should add a random amount of padding to the plaintext before encrypting. Simply not writing a length and assuming the attacker can't figure it out isn't a good plan. I've given 2 examples of how the spec still leaks that length -- similar IVs and using the length stored for each page header.

My second point is that I don't think that leaking the length of the plaintext is worth worrying about.

Author: Oh, I see. 'plaintext' threw me off, we keep the ciphertext length, but you mean the plaintext length before encryption.

Author: _I'm okay with using option 1 for all IVs._
Sounds good, adding to the spec.

_Because the page header must have a length, an attacker can identify where each encrypted page header starts and work backward from there._
Yep, possible, but with a certain effort / probability of success. If we replicate and explicitly expose the page length, an attack will require no effort and will be 100% successful.  I guess my point here - security is not a binary thing, its often about defense in depth, making an attacker work harder to learn something about the sensitive data. Sometimes, its worth an effort on the defender part to hide things. But in this case, we don't even have to make an effort - we get this feature out of box. We just shouldn't make an effort to expose this field; especially since we won't use it; only an attacker would. More on this later.

_security through obscurity_ 
Agreed, we don't want this. The only place I relied on obscurity was for page swapping attacks within the same chunk. I'm adding a page ordinal to the spec (4 bytes; but let me know if 2 are enough). With this addition, the spec won't have any dependency on obscurity, both implicitly and explicitly (it is not mentioned as a part of the security design).

_hiding the lengths ... makes this spec harder to implement_
That's where we differ. Page length is kept in page headers and read from there by the existing Parquet code. Once the page header is encrypted, we don't need to make any effort to hide the length. Exposing the length will actually require an effort and Parquet code changes, as follows:
1. Writer will need to serialize the length and write it to the stream.
2. Reader doesn't need this field. We will have to change Parquet reader code - to either read and deserialize this field, in addition to the length in PageHeaders - or to ignore it, which will require some form of data skipping, with or without a seek.

Again, all this might be done, for a good cause. But in my view, the net result of this effort would be helping an attacker.

Reviewer: If the length of a plaintext page is something that should be protected, then Parquet should pad before encrypting. Anything else is security through obscurity, which you agree we should not employ here. I don't buy the argument about making it harder. Page headers are reliably short and those lengths will be easy to identify.

Hiding the length does make this harder to implement. Instead of a function to go read an encrypted buffer and return its bytes, you need to have two methods: one with an explicit length and one without. Instead of having a method that encrypts bytes and writes out a buffer, you need two: one that write the length and one that only returns it. You need to make sure that the right method is used in the right places. And what's worse, is that you must make it absolutely clear for other people that are implementing the spec.

Any time you add special cases, it makes a spec harder to implement.

This comes from the same motivation for using only one IV format. The fewer cases, the easier this is to implement. That makes it more reliable.

I'm against trading clarity in the spec just to obscure something that can be easily recovered and isn't a problem anyway. If you want to hide the length of the plaintext, then hide it by padding before encryption. Don't obscure it at the cost of simplicity.

Reviewer: > let me know if 2 are enough

2 bytes for a page ordinal within a row group should be sufficient.

Author: Ok. Given the technical trade-offs involved, this is not worth delaying the work.

|---------------|--------------------------------|----------------|

or 

| IV (16 bytes) | ciphertext (`page_size` bytes) | 
|---------------|--------------------------------|

A `crypto_meta_data` field is set in each `ColumnChunk` in the encrypted columns. 
`ColumnCryptoMetaData` is a union - the actual structure is chosen depending on whether the 
column is encrypted with the footer key, or with a column-specific key. For the latter, 

> a key metadata can be specified, with a maximal length of 512. Key metadata is a free-form

Reviewer: Why is this size limited to 512?

> byte array that can be used by a reader to retrieve the encryption key (see next subsection). 

Reviewer: It should be clear exactly which structures are encrypted using the key specified here. This is used for any column-specific encryption, right? So that would be all page headers, page data buffers, the column index, the offset index, and the column metadata?

```c
struct EncryptionWithFooterKey {
}

struct EncryptionWithColumnKey {
  /** Column path in schema **/
  1: required list<string> path_in_schema
  
  /** Retrieval metadata of the column-specific key **/
  2: optional binary column_key_metadata
}

union ColumnCryptoMetaData {
  1: EncryptionWithFooterKey ENCRYPTION_WITH_FOOTER_KEY
  2: EncryptionWithColumnKey ENCRYPTION_WITH_COLUMN_KEY
}

struct ColumnChunk {
...
  /** Crypto metadata of encrypted columns **/
  8: optional ColumnCryptoMetaData crypto_meta_data
}
```

The `path_in_schema` field in  `EncryptionWithColumnKey` structure is needed because the 
column name (path) is kept inside the encrypted `ColumnMetaData`. The column name is required 
to build the AAD for decryption of the `ColumnMetaData` (see above). Also, the column name can 

> be used for explicit passing of a decryption key for this column, without calling a key retrieval callback.

Reviewer: FileMetaData stores the schema, and the order here must match the order in the schema. I don't think the `path_in_schema` field is needed and it should be removed. In addition, I think the AAD should be based on the ordinal anyway.

Author: The reason is the integrity chain of trust. 

1. If footer is encrypted, and we trust all entities that have the footer key, then no problem.

2. If footer is plaintext, or we don'y fully trust an entity that got the footer key (say to read plaintext columns in the file) - the following attack is possible: 
- ColumnMetaData of ColA are swapped with ColumnMetaData of ColB
- Column order is changed in file footer / schema
- Since column ordinal is not explicitly recorded in ColumnMetaData, we can't verify it after decryption
- The result: reader of ColA gets data of ColB (say both are of int type)

However, path_in_schema is explicitly recorded in ColumnMetaData. Therefore, we can compare it to the AAD and detect the swapping.

I agree we don't have to keep path_in_schema in ColumnCryptoMetaData. Its a convenience, though, similar to keeping it in the ColumnMetaData (that also can use the ordinal to find it - but I guess prefers to have it readily available).

Author: I have a nagging feeling using the column number instead of explicit name is less safe, and can enable data swapping attacks. But let me think more about this. Today is a weekend here, on Sunday I'll try to work out the details of an attack - and possible defenses.

In the meantime - can you say why do you prefer the column ordinal to the name (path)? We consider an untrusted footer situation, where the footer fields (eg schema, order of column chunks, etc) can be modified by an attacker. ColumnMetaData can be swapped together with the column chunks - but the content integrity of ColumnMetaData is protected (by column key), and also, we assign an AAD to verify its "identity".

Author: The analysis has led to discovery of a more substantial threat. If the footer is untrusted - an attacker can remove full row groups (if there is more than one) - their pages, and/or their metadata inside the footer. Column encryption keys can't protect against this, because this is not column specific. The footer encryption key can.
Therefore, we should actually simplify the quality of service model. Plaintext footer mode doesn't guarantee data integrity protection. Users that care about data integrity attacks, must use the Encrypted footer mode.
Regarding column ordinal vs path - they offer the same level of integrity protection in the encrypted footer mode, since the schema can't be modified.

Reviewer 2: The footer (or the whole file) could still be signed to prevent malicious modifications if we wanted to improve plain-text footer mode. The question is, how much extra complexity is this compatibility-mode worth? Personally I think that plain-text footer mode already complicates the design significantly while providing only questionable benefits. On the other hand, relative to the already existing plain-text footer design, adding a signature would only make it marginally more complicated.

Reviewer 2: > instead of a sudden and painful migration from fully unprotected data - to fully protected data, the users can make the transition gradual, via an intermediate stage

Actually this is possible without a plain text footer mode as well, just takes more time:

- With the plain text footer mode, you first enable writing partially encrypted files, then update all your workflows to support encryption.
- Wihtout plain text footer mode, first you have to update all of your workflows to support encryption and only then you can enable encryption for writing new files.

Still, we have only reached an intermediate stage in both cases, because now some of the data are encrypted, some of it not. Phasing out unencrypted files is a separate step after this that would happen the same way in both cases.

Author: In general, yes, but the user's organization had not be willing to upgrade the workflow parts that don't touch the sensitive data.

Regarding the footer signature proposal - the more I think about it, the more I like it. The writer of encrypted files is connected to KMS. Hence it can get a "footer key" - but in a plaintext footer mode, will use it to sign the hash of the footer. The signed hash is written before the footer in the file, followed by the plaintext footer.  The legacy and new readers that parse plaintext columns only, don't care about this field. However, the new readers that parse sensitive columns - are connected to KMS, and have no problem getting the "footer key" and checking the footer integrity. 
Yes, it makes the model a bit more complex, but for a good reason. If this makes sense, lets add this feature.

Author: Or encrypt the serialized footer using AES GCM with the footer key and the AAD - and save the GCM tag (16 bytes) only. This is enough to verify footer integrity at the reader.

Reviewer: I like the idea of using AES-GCM to produce an AAD and writing just the tag and not the encrypted footer. That's a great idea that doesn't require a lot of additional structures or specification.

Reviewer: > can you say why do you prefer the column ordinal to the name (path)?

The security provided is identical, but you end up with an AAD suffix that is smaller to process and simpler to build.

   wrapped either remotely in a KMS, or locally after retrieving the Master key from KMS. 
   Wrapping format depends on the KMS and can be a JSON string, or a base64 encoded byte array 
   in a case of local wrapping.
   * Short ID (counter) of a key inside the Parquet data file. The Data key is wrapped with a Master 
   key using one of the options described above – but the resulting key material is stored separately, 
   outside the data file, and will be retrieved using the counter and file path.
   * Any of the three above, plus a string ID of the KMS instance (in case there are many).
   * Random string (useful for creation of footer keys in organizations not willing to 
   authenticate and connect all readers to a KMS. The footer key is generated as F(key_metadata), 
   where F is an algorithm unknown outside organization. These keys are less secure than 
   KMS-managed keys, but better than using no keys at all in plaintext footers, see a discussion below).

Key metadata can also be empty (not set) - in a case the encryption keys are fully managed by the 
caller code, and passed explicitly to Parquet for the footer and each encrypted column.

> ### Protection of column metadata

Reviewer: There are two more options I'd like to explore. The problem with the current approach is that it requires more backward seeks to read the data and to make that more efficient, some assumptions about how the encrypted column meta data buffers are laid out (backward seek to the first one, then read to footer start, then alter offsets to read from that buffer).

## Embedding encrypted `ColumnMetaData`

One option is to add a binary field to `ColumnChunk` called `encrypted_column_metadata` and put the encryption buffer there. This would mean we have to decode a Thrift structure after decrypting the data, but it would avoid the location and seek problems.

## Using unencrypted `ColumnMetaData`

The new column index structures encode all of the data from statistics, which is optional and the main piece of data that encryption is protecting. This spec could simply state that column stats must be null when encrypting a column. Without statistics, the most sensitive data is `num_values`, `encodings` / `encoding_stats`, and the `uncompressed_size` (compressed size is the same so you can tell this from the ciphertext).

I think it would be reasonable to expose the remaining data fields because they contain no values. We could also add `num_values` to `OffsetIndex` and create a filtered version of `ColumnMetaData` without statistics or the count.

The impact of this on performance would be low when the column index and offset index structures are written because Parquet could get the column stats from those structures.

Author: I like the **Embedding encrypted ColumnMetaData** option - it saves a seek, but still allows for column chunk filtering without a need to compute column (chunk) stats from multiple index structures.

Reviewer: Sounds good to me.

The Parquet file footer, and its nested structures, contain sensitive information - ranging 
from a secret data (column statistics) to other information that can be exploited by an 
attacker (e.g. schema, num_values, key_value_metadata, column data offset and size, encoding and crypto_meta_data). 
This information is automatically protected when the footer and secret columns are encrypted 
with the same key. In other cases - when column(s) and the footer are encrypted with 
different keys; or column(s) are encrypted and the footer is not - an extra measure is 
required to protect the column-specific information in the file footer. In these cases, 
the column-specific information (kept in `ColumnMetaData` structures) is split from the 

> footer by utilizing the `required i64 file_offset` parameter in the `ColumnChunk` 

Reviewer: The `file_offset` field cannot be repurposed. This would be a breaking change to the format.

Add a new field, `encrypted_column_metadata_offset` instead. Also note the behavior when `file_path` is set. I think that the column metadata would be in the same file as the metadata, not in the file identified by `file_path`.

Reviewer: Also, this should specify where the encrypted column metadata structures should be written. Between the column index structures and the footer? I think they would need to be written after the indexes (to store those locations) and before the footer (to put the location here).

structure. This allows to serialize each `ColumnMetaData` structure separately and encrypt 
it with a column-specific key, thus protecting the column stats and other metadata. 

```c
struct ColumnChunk {
...
  /** Byte offset in file_path to the ColumnMetaData **/
  2: required i64 file_offset

  /** Column metadata for this chunk. This is the same content as what is at
   * file_path/file_offset.  Having it here has it replicated in the file
   * metadata.
   **/
  3: optional ColumnMetaData meta_data
..
}
```

### Encrypted footer mode

In files with sensitive column data, a good security practice is to encrypt not only the 

> secret columns, but also the file footer metadata with a separate footer key. This hides

Reviewer: This should not make recommendations about key management, like "with a separate footer key". It can state that it is a good idea to encrypt the footer, but shouldn't recommend a separate key.

the file schema / column names, number of rows, key-value properties, column sort order, 
column data offset and size, list of encrypted columns and metadata of the column encryption keys. 
It also makes the footer tamper-proof and helps to prevent module replacement attacks.

The columns encrypted with the same key as the footer don't separate the ColumnMetaData from the 
ColumnChunks, leaving it at the original location, `optional ColumnMetaData meta_data`. This field
is not set for columns encrypted with a column-specific key.

A Thrift-serialized `FileCryptoMetaData` structure is written after the footer. It contains 
information on the file encryption algorithm and on the footer (offset in 

> the file, and an optional key metadata, with a maximal length of 512). Then 

Reviewer: Several places note that the maximum length of the key metadata is 512 somethings. This should not be duplicated. Key metadata should be documented in one place and referenced.

the length of this structure is written as a 4-byte little endian integer, followed by a final 
magic string, "PARE".
The same magic bytes are written at the beginning of the file (offset 0).
Parquet readers start file parsing by reading and checking the magic string. Therefore, the 
encrypted footer mode uses a new magic string ("PARE") in order to  instruct readers to look 
for a file crypto metadata at the end of the file - and also to immediately inform 
legacy readers (expecting ‘PAR1’ bytes) that they can’t parse this file.

```c
/** Crypto metadata for files with encrypted footer **/
struct FileCryptoMetaData {
  /** 
   * Encryption algorithm. Note that this field is only used for files
   * with encrypted footer. Files with plaintext footer store the algorithm id
   * inside footer (FileMetaData structure).
   */
  1: required EncryptionAlgorithm encryption_algorithm
    
  /** Retrieval metadata of key used for encryption of footer, 
   *  and (possibly) columns **/
  2: optional binary footer_key_metadata

  /** Offset of encrypted Parquet footer **/

>   3: required i64 footer_offset

Reviewer: The offset at the end of the file should be the footer offset, just like in unencrypted files. If the FileCryptoMetaData is written after the footer, writing the footer offset there still works.

The reason for this is that we want to avoid backward seeks, which are expensive. If the footer offset is only available here, then there are 3 backward seeks: one to the offset and magic bytes, one to the start of FileCryptoMetaData, and one to the start of the Footer . . . and probably one to the start of the ColumnMetaDatas and maybe yet another to the start of the offset indexes!

Keeping the footer offset at the end before the magic bytes allows reading both the footer and the crypto metadata in one read and avoids an expensive backward seek.

Author: Good point, I haven't thought about seek costs. Actually, the current mr implementation also doesn't minimize the seeks - there is one to len-4 for magic bytes, one to len-8 for footer length, and then to the footer. Its possible of course to seek len-8 and read the 8 bytes. I'll implement seek minimization for both plaintext and encrypted footers. In order to save the magic number seek, this will require a use of the current 4 byte field (shift) instead of 8 bytes (offset) - the footer offset is calculated as len - 8 - shift.
Shift is equal to the FileMetaData length for plaintext footers, and to the combined length of FileMetaData and FileCryptoMetaData for encrypted footers.

Reviewer: I don't get what you're talking about using shift instead of offset. Either way, we have to store a value that gets us to the start of the footer. We should be using a fixed-width value there so that we can seek directly to the start of it to read the offset and magic at the same time.

I think that encrypted files should use the same method to get to the start of the footer that is used by unencrypted files. The start of the footer should be where the encrypted buffer's length or IV is stored, depending on which comes first.

Author: I'm saying there is no a footer offset field today (offset from the file start, an 8 byte long). Instead, there is a 4-byte int field that is used to calculate the footer offset, by backshifting the current position. Anyways, this is semantics. Your second comment says we are in sync on this.

}
```

Only the `FileCryptoMetaData` is written as a plaintext; all other file parts are protected

> (as needed) with appropriate keys.

Reviewer: I think it's a bad idea to use "(as needed)". All encrypted structures should be specified in this doc.

structure for all columns, but is stripped of the statistics for the sensitive (encrypted) columns. 
These statistics are available for new readers with the column key - they fetch the separated ColumnMetaData, 
and decrypt it to get all metadata values. The legacy readers are not aware of the separated metadata; 
they parse the embedded field as usual. While they can't read the data of the encrypted columns, they 
read the metadata to extract the offset and size of the column data - required for input vectorization
(see the next section).

An `encryption_algorithm` field is set at the FileMetaData structure. Then the footer is written as usual, 
followed by its length (4-byte little endian integer) and a final magic string, "PAR1".
The same magic string is written at the beginning of the file (offset 0). 
The magic bytes for plaintext footer mode are ‘PAR1’ to allow older readers to read projections of the 
file that do not include encrypted columns.

```c
struct FileMetaData {
...
  /** 
   * Encryption algorithm. Note that this field is only used for files
   * with plaintext footer. Files with encrypted footer store the algorithm id
   * in FileCryptoMetaData structure.
   */

>   8: optional EncryptionAlgorithm encryption_algorithm

Reviewer: Is this field set when using an encrypted footer? Its value should always be specified.

Author: This field is only used for files with plaintext footer. It is not set for files with encrypted footers. I'll add this to the comment.
